Bloomberg Audio Studios. Podcasts,
radio, news.
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, I don't know about you, but when I
think about Alaska, I think about snow,
glaciers, gold, oil, pipelines, northern
exposure, small planes, and
the 12th District of the Federal Reserve
System of Banks.
>> This literally the exact list that I
think in
in that precise order. It's incredible.
Yeah, it's incredible.
>> I can't believe it. All right. Well, we
are in fact here in Alaska, in Anchorage
to be specific, and it's a really
interesting time to be taking a field
trip to the very very northern state
because Alaska actually has a lot of
relevance to our current period.
>> see, you know, I used to talk about how
like Arizona was a very odd logistic
state.
And I still think but this is a very odd
logistic state because there are so many
specific things that we hear about here,
whether it's a demographic shift, oil,
obviously. Logistics Logistics is huge.
It's you just feel the presence of the
various train and plane hubs and ship
hubs here in Alaska. So, it is and
housing, which has a very difficult
housing environment here, too. So, it is
a very meaty area for us to do our
coverage.
>> Absolutely. And we do in fact have the
perfect guest to talk all about it. We
are going to be speaking with Mary Daly.
She is of course the San Francisco Fed
president and therefore the president of
the 12th District, and Alaska is in that
district, and she's here on a trip, and
she's going to talk to us for quite a
while. So, Mary, welcome to the show.
>> Thank you so much. I'm delighted to be
here, and I'm so delighted that we're in
Alaska together.
>> I was going to ask, how often do you
actually come here?
>> I come regularly, but it's not just me.
Members of my team, the economist, our
engagement officers, our public
engagement officers, they come, too.
Ultimately, we are trying to source
information from all of our states. So,
we go to all the states in our district,
there's nine of them, and we ask
questions of all of them about how
they're living in the economy, what are
the things that concern them, what are
the opportunities, what are the
challenges.
>> So, big picture, how's the Alaska
economy right now? Or what do you what
constitutes the Alaska economy actually?
>> Well, let me tell you something I
learned the first time I came to Alaska.
It isn't an economy, it's a series of
economies. Right? If you go to the more
remote areas that you can only, say,
access by airplane, you can't eat there,
are no roads, they live on a in a
cashless economy with subsistence. That
looks very different than Anchorage,
where you're using your digital wallet
to pay for things locally that more
familiar to the lower 48. And so,
really, when you think of Alaska, you
have to think of economies, communities,
and you have to imagine that the leaders
here and the population here has to come
together to ensure that all the
decisions they make serve the variety of
needs they have. I think that's what
makes it so rich. It really is at the
forefront of so many things that can
affect the national economy that it's a
really great place to learn.
>> Is Alaska of particular relevance at
this particular moment in time when, you
know, uncertainty is the word of the
day? We do have tariffs going on,
inflation is still a lingering concern,
and Alaska, of course, does already have
a high cost of living.
>> So, you know, think about Alaska as,
right now, a leading indicator. They're
sitting in the the perfect storm, if you
will, of all the things going on in our
economy. They have a higher price level,
and we they've suffered even more from
rising inflation. They are thinking hard
about how do they import and how do they
do this given the tariffs. They are a
recipient of tremendous amount of
federal spending related to strategic
defense and the military capacity and
even things like satellites. So, they
are right there. And so, coming here and
seeing how they're dealing with it, one,
it tells me how resilient our economy is
more generally to these different
changes. And two, it provides me a
leading indication of how businesses in
communities that are right there on the
forefront are going to respond to this.
And I can use that information to look
on the lower 48, especially my state,
and ask, "What are we seeing there?" So,
it gives me early insight into the
changes and how they're likely to affect
the economy.
>> Joe, Mary just did the intro better than
I did, I think.
>> Resilient and scrappy feels like one of
those things where like every town in
the world or every city likes to
describe their residents as such, but
this is like the first place I've been
where I like 100% believe it. And when
hearing the stories of people who have
been here multiple generations, it's
like, "Okay, you actually I actually
fully buy that." But, it's interesting.
So, one of the There's a lot to go down,
but we've heard about declining
population levels, particularly in
Anchorage. And it's interesting to me
because you're the San Francisco Fed
president, so you have part of your
district that's wrestling with
population decline. And then also San
Francisco itself, this massively housing
constrained
destination for labor, right? Where
people want to go to make their fortunes
in a different kind of gold rush. But,
talk to us about like, you know, your
perception of the economic challenges in
a place where there's a lot of
out-migration, where it's difficult to
say keep young people around.
>> It's very difficult. Alaska is not
unique there. You can outside of my
district at North Dakota and other
places and go to these rural communities
and they'll say, "We want to keep our
people." And it's hard to do it, right?
But, what is particularly true in Alaska
is there's several things going on all
at once. And ultimately, when people
decide to stay at a place or come to a
place, they want an ecosystem of things
that are important to their ability to
thrive. They want to have work, and not
just work they start when they're 22,
but work that they can grow into and
maybe change into as they age. They want
to have housing opportunities so that if
they want to raise a family or if they
just want to own a home, they have that.
At this point, there's even trouble
getting property even if you're just
leasing it. So, there's those types of
pressures. So, that's taking that risk.
And then if you're trying to build a
family, there's the schooling issues.
Our population outflows mean that
>> Mhm.
>> fewer schools are available. So, then
the equation starts to break down. It
would you know, really has to happen is
they have to believe that they can stay
because something more prosperous will
occur or that they really like the
outdoors and being part of this beauty.
And I think that that equation's not
penciling out like it was because
ultimately, if people don't have jobs or
a place to live or see a bright future
for their career and their family, then
they will feel forced to go elsewhere.
And I think that's where the state
leadership and the Anchorage leadership
and all the business leaders I meet
with, that's their fundamental concern.
One person put it this way, "How do we
attract people?" That's important, but
how do we maintain them? How do we
retain the interest in us when our
economy is not doing as well as some
competing economies in the lower 48.
>> Well, on that note, can you talk a
little bit maybe about the cost of
living in Alaska cuz this is another
thing that is, you know, somewhat
unique. There are higher prices for just
simple things like groceries, housing
might be constrained in a way that you
wouldn't like necessarily think about
for a place as big as Alaska. But, this
comes up quite a lot and I'm very
curious how you're thinking about
inflationary pressures on Alaska
specifically given that over the past
few years, inflation was a concern for
all of the states, but I imagine it was
an extra concern here in this particular
one.
>> Absolutely. You start with this
just the recognition that almost
everything costs more in Alaska. Why?
Well, you have to import a lot of the
things that we
take for granted, you know, whether it's
health care products or things that you
can use for your buildings or simple
groceries and shoes and other things.
Now, we import a lot of that stuff to
the broader US, but the shipping costs
to come all the way up to Alaska and
then the distribution across the greater
Alaskan region is very challenging.
There's transportation costs that if you
only take that alone, really drive up
the prices. That's already a higher
price level and then you add to it a
higher inflation rate. Well, then if the
pain that anyone might feel in the lower
48, that's just magnified in Alaska.
You put with that the fact that in the,
you know, 20 years ago, wages in Alaska
used to be higher than wages in the
lower 48, but that gap is shrunk over
the last 20 years. And so now the wage
levels are roughly the same and the
prices are a lot higher and inflation is
driving those up more and things aren't
getting cheaper to import into Alaska
and I think that's why people say, you
know, it's just when I try to build a
property, I'm a builder and now I have
to pay higher cost to ship things in and
then if I get tariffs on top of that on
the basic inputs, that just doesn't
pencil out anymore. And that's the
equation they're dealing with. It's just
more expensive, it's harder, it's cold
here, it's remote in many places and all
of those put challenges that ultimately
raise costs.
>> Probably like the biggest question right
now in this sort of for the whole US is
the degree to which tariffs will be
inflationary, the degree to which
they'll be passed on to consumers or
absorbed by whoever. What specifically
are you hearing from businesses about
what they can do and the actual impact
of tariffs on their operations?
>> Sure, I'll start with Alaska since we're
here and I've been meeting with
businesses since I came, but I'll go
broaden it if you don't mind. So, on the
Alaska, we're hearing very similar
things to what we're hearing in the
lower 48. We're hearing that
they want to pass it along to consumers
because
it's challenging to deal with, but that
consumers are exhausted. You know,
that's a phrase I hear a lot, consumers
are exhausted. I just don't know how
much they can do. They're already
trading down. If they used to go to one
retailer, they're moving to the next
level down, showing up in the dollar
stores to try to find ways to make ends
meet, or they're just foregoing things
that they might do in the past. Those
things put pressure on firms to say,
"Well, if I raise my prices, I'm going
to lose my sales, and I have to pencil
that equation out." So, I see more of
them eating it in into their profits,
and then just hoping that they can
either collectively go to Washington and
get an exception for whatever they're
trying to import or use, or they can
weather a the one-off tariff increase
and then move to a more normal to
things. You know, in construction,
you're hearing things like, "Well, we we
moved from steel framing to lumber
framing, wood framing, because steel was
tariffed, and now we're looking for
alternatives that we can make here or
have lower import costs."
>> like a serious trade-off going from
steel to lumber framing.
>> Well, you know, it
what's remarkable, and this is
remarkable, and I think Alaska does this
in ways that are even more innovative
than other places I've seen, is
construction and engineers, they know
how to build things, and they know how
to make them durable. So, you give them
a set of materials. It's almost like
when you do those cooking shows, and
they give you a box of things, and they
say to the people, "Make something
delicious." That's what construction
people and engineers are good at for
about. They say, "Here's my box of
things. I'm going to make a house that's
durable, can last the cold climate, can
be built on the permafrost. I'm going to
figure it out." And I don't count them
out because they're very good at this,
and it ultimately leads to the
innovation that's needed to deal with
the higher cost. The problem is it's
happening all at once, and it makes it
really hard to innovate fast enough to
offset the cost. So, I'm hearing
pass-through, but I'm not hear seeing a
lot of it. You saw this in the published
data, spreading it out past Alaska.
Published data is coming out. Goods
price inflation is going up. It's not
spilling over into services inflation,
either in housing or in services, you
know, what what I think of as super core
services ex-housing. That's good news.
And the best sense from history and from
what's happening right now is that there
won't be much of an impetus so far to
spill over. That would get into a
persistent inflation problem. You can't
count it out, of course, but I don't
think there's a lot of evidence that
it's occurring.
>> I have a bunch more tariff questions,
but since you mentioned history just
then, one thing I'm really curious
about, is there anything we can learn
about how inflation expectations work
from the Alaskan experience? So, this is
a state where a higher cost of living
has been top-of-mind. When you start to
see those idiosyncratic developments in
terms of prices, when people are talking
about something like tariffs, do you see
expectations for future rates of
inflation ramp up faster here than
perhaps elsewhere in the US?
>> So, there's not a lot of good data on
statewide inflation expectations, so we
have to rely on talking with people. And
when I talk with people, they worry
more, but they don't There's a
difference. Inflation expectations, the
way you can measure it is, am I asking
for a higher wage? Am I going in and
saying, I can't keep up, I need a higher
wage. And we don't really see a
difference here in Alaska than we do in
the lower 48. We just see that when
inflation gets to rising fast and the
labor market's tight, then individuals
say, I'm going to go ask my firm, and
the firms are more willing to give it.
But now that the labor market has
softened,
people aren't that interested in going
in and saying, I want more money. It
also is consistent with them thinking
that the tariffs are a one-off. The best
way I know to think about inflation
expectations and kind of gather that
kind of information is look at
short-term inflation expectations versus
medium and longer-run inflation
expectations. So, all I can do is ask
Alaskans that question, and I I seen
anything different than the published
data for the nation, which is short-term
arising, medium and longer run, they
still believe that we can get inflation
down to 2%.
That suggests to me they think it's a
one-off. Tariffs go up, you pay for
them, and it's all about managing the
increased costs rather than thinking
this is just another run of of
inflation.
>> Maybe it's a process question, but you
know, obviously when it comes to the
dual mandate,
there's a lot of good government data.
Actually, we should talk about data
quality, too, and but I'm curious like
what is the additional thing that you
get out of these trips other I mean,
it's good to have anecdotes, it's good
to make face-to-faces as the regional
Fed president, but when you think about
incorporating your process or how it may
even affect the future votes on interest
rate decisions, what do these trips add
to official sources of data?
>> Yeah, sure, absolutely. So, the
most important thing is that I learn
about how the economy actually works.
It's very difficult to know how tariffs
will affect an economy if you don't know
how it works. It's very difficult to
know how inflation will affect the
economy or if the housing crisis that
they talk about is really larger than
the housing challenges you see in other
places or it's the same. And
importantly, it's not just a trip to
Alaska that informs that, it's a trip to
variety of places that we serve, and
that's why regional Fed presidents are
out a lot because we're trying to
collect the information. That's the one
big reason to learn about it. You know,
when I take a tour of, you know, a port
or a manufacturing plant or a drilling
facility, I'm learning how those things
work together so that I can better
understand how the economy will
perform in when they face a shock. It's
not all about the price of oil. It's
about how many workers do they have?
What's the drilling? Where the bits?
What are you working on? Where do you
get your things? So, that's piece one.
Piece two is data are almost entirely
backward-looking. They tell you about
what happened last week, last month,
last year.
But, you can't make policy on
backward-looking data. So, it tells you
where we are in level terms, but it
doesn't tell you where you're going. And
so, getting to talk with people and
actually ask them questions like this. I
ask this question all the time now. So,
you feel really uncertain? I'm sure
that's worrisome. Are you changing your
behavior because of it? And the first
question is always yes, we're very
uncertain. And the second one has been
we're not changing our behavior
entirely. So, I'm continuing to invest,
but I'm not necessarily taking on
riskier projects. I want a good ROI if
I'm going to keep going. So, I think
that's another reason to come. And then
the third reason to come, and this is
really important and and I think
underappreciated, is the Federal Reserve
Act created 12 Reserve Banks and a Board
of Governors. And did so, if you go back
and look at the original document, to
recognize that you can't make policy
that serves the nation if you only are
in DC.
But, that gives us a responsibility as
Reserve Bank Presidents to represent the
people who we're serving in terms of
learning about them and bringing their
collected information to help us make
national policy. So, that's what we do.
And when we come, people feel like we
are
doing the work on their behalf and trust
goes up. And when trust goes up, as I've
said many times and many of my
colleagues have, trust is one of our
most important tools because if people
believe we can achieve price stability
and full employment, then they behave as
if we can achieve price stability and
full employment. And that's a virtuous
cycle that actually delivers it faster.
>> This was going to be my next question,
actually. And again, it's kind of a
process question, but if your job is to
represent the 12th District and the 12th
District has diverse states in it, and
Alaska perhaps in many ways, is an
outlier. How do you actually judge I I
guess, or how do you make sure that
you're representing different interests,
perhaps different states might be at
different places in the economic cycle?
And you're dealing with basically an
interest rate that tends to be a single
one-size-fits-all interest rate, a
pretty blunt tool in many ways. How do
you balance that?
>> That's a great question.
And I'll say it this way. Representing
the economies and the voices of the
people doesn't mean
we're transactionally balancing the
interest rates hurts you and helps you,
because we can't make national policy
for any particular region. Not the 12th
district, not the first district, not a
state, and that's just part of the
constraints of our job, right? We have a
dual mandate for the nation. So, you're
aggregating up the data. But then it's a
mistake to think that if you have the
aggregate statistics, you know how the
economy's faring. There are many places
where, let's take tariffs and federal
spending cuts, and oil and gas drilling,
deregulation,
that's happening all in Alaska. So,
Alaska becomes the leading indicator in
many ways for how this is affecting the
economy. And so, if I see it here, I can
then expect to see it other places. In
some time periods, that would not be
true. Alaska would not be a leading
indicator. It would lag the economic
performance of the country and or any
economic changes. So, you know your
states and your economy as well enough,
and all my colleagues know their states
and economies well enough that they know
where we are in the business cycle or
the sequencing of things to know which
states are leading, which states are
following, and then which states are
being most impacted or less impacted, so
that we can make better policy. The
other way I put it together is an
interesting thing about having a very
diverse district is you start to learn
how similar people are.
>> Mhm.
>> You know, everybody wants the same
thing. They want inflation to be at
target. They want to have economy that's
sustainably thriving, that's sustainably
available. They want to be rationally
inattentive to inflation and whether the
economy is going to be pushed into a
recession. They just don't want to think
about it. And that's a universal truth.
It doesn't matter if I'm in Alaska,
Hawaii, or Nevada. Doesn't matter. Idaho
feels the same way as California in that
goal, in that sense. And so I can go and
see to that point, are people nervous?
Are they optimistic? Are they cautiously
optimistic? Today, I see concerns. But
when you really push them, and this is
true across the 12th District, people
are cautiously optimistic. Some cities
have more cranes than others, but
everybody's got a crane.
>> When we last had you on the podcast when
you were coming through New York City,
we talked a little bit about about AI
and you represent the home of the most
advanced AI models in the world. When
you're out here talking to many of these
sort of old-school industries, do you
talk to them or hear anything about tech
diffusion, like the implementation of
these? And is there anything interesting
that you've picked up on that?
>> Absolutely. Let me start with the most
interesting thing I picked up and I'll
expand it to the other things. I
want to give a shout out to the small
businesses. So small businesses are that
can be remote across Alaska. It's hard
for them physically to reach
marketplaces that are not in their
immediate area. They often have limited
workforce availability in some of these
places or just small businesses in
general. You're dealing with rising
costs. And so you want to keep your
portfolio of labor small. And they turn
to AI to do things that augment their
output because they're augmenting their
skills. So it's that they can save time.
They can do You can write a marketing
plan by asking one of the AI models,
here's my inputs, can you write a
marketing plan? And already you're
ahead. Can you write me a pitch deck?
Can you write me Can you tell me the
five best marketplaces in the United
States for the products I want to sell?
All of this makes it better. And it's
not it's not limited though to just that
kind of marketing and growth sales. It's
actually also about can I do things
differently. So, we were talking to a
small manufacturing firm, not in Alaska,
but I've seen that hearing the same
things here, that had said, "We're able
to use AI to do first drafts of plans
based on the 30-year history of all
plans we've ever made to create this one
small part that someone asked me to
machine." So, those are the kinds of
things that I'm starting to see spread.
Then, if you're a larger business here
in Alaska, you want to use AI just like
any other company in the nation to make
sure you're not falling behind to get a
competitive edge, right? These things
These tools are helpful, and it's not
just about reading your emails faster or
writing a draft of something. It's about
really thinking about your core
business. What can I do with AI that
helps me save
time and helps me augment my existing
workforce when we have often a workforce
shortage.
>> Mhm. How are you thinking about AI
generally? And one of the reasons I ask
this is because one of our frequent
guest, Neel Dutta, was writing a guest
piece in our newsletter today, and he
was talking about how there's pressure
on the housing market, there's pressure
on consumers, and then you have this
third big trend in the US economy, which
is this massive investment boom in AI.
And in some sense, it feels like the AI
investment boom is very, very divorced
from the health of the consumer and
other things going on in the economy.
How are you factoring that into I I
guess monetary policy and how you feel
about things more generally?
>> Well, it's very true that the AI
investment boom doesn't look like the
You just look at stock market prices and
valuations, right? If you look at the
the companies that are invested in AI
development, they look different than or
AI support, they look different than the
companies that are doing mainline
manufacturing. I mean, this is a fact.
But, I don't see that as a competing
interest. I see that as that's a
structural development that's just going
to keep going. And then, on the other
side, you have the cyclical aspects of
the economy, and people do feel
stressed. They've been dealing with high
inflation, and it's coming down, of
course, which is great news, but still
the price level's higher. They're
dealing now with job security issues,
like whether maybe even if they're not
it's not true that they'll lose their
job or layoffs around the corner,
they're nervous, and they say they're
nervous. And so, you know, you sense
that I'm not sure about the future kind
of component. I don't see those two
things as competing as much as we have
to manage in monetary policy the
cyclical dynamics, and it's very good in
many ways that there's something coming
down the pipe that could be useful. The
question I have right now is are
companies deploying the technology and
diffusing it at a more rapid rate that
offsets some of the concerns they had
about tight labor market. And I am
seeing a little bit of that. But mostly
what I'm seeing is how are we going to
go forward faster, better, cheaper. How
are we going to up our game and not
raise our cost? In fact, how are we
going to get cost down? And AI becomes
something they can try. And, you know, a
year ago when we talked, or whenever
that maybe it was only 6 months ago,
when we talked, we were doing these CEO
roundtables as part of our emerging tech
economic research network. So, we do a
lot of these across all business types,
and they were saying, "We're not doing
it in front office operations. We're not
doing it in our main product lines.
We're only going to do back office."
Now, it's moving to the front.
>> Oh, that's cool.
>> And that tells you something's changing.
One of the things that I asked somebody
why, and they said, "It's just a lot
easier to do it than you think. And we
can discipline the models ourselves. We
can prevent hallucination by checking."
So, now they feel more comfortable.
>> I feel like the change in model quality
in the last 6 months is really
remarkable. And just and like many of
the concerns about hallucinations, they
still exist, but they seem much less of
a problem today than even 6 months ago
when you were playing with the most
advanced models. That being said, you
said you talked about here's this
potential productivity enhancer, and you
said I don't coming down the pike or I
forget exactly the term company still
trying it.
As of today, it doesn't feel like okay,
we've seen some great product general
economy wide productivity gains.
However, what we do see is very high
electricity prices. Maybe data centers
playing some role. They're still for the
ISM continual shortages of electronic
components or these very intense
>> transformers
>> very intense capital demands at a time
when AI hasn't delivered economy wide
productivity gains. Could there be an
element where there's like a crowding
out element right now or like this
productivity from all that investment
that hasn't paid off yet.
>> You know, there's always going to be
this discontinuity
putting a time economist term, but
there's always going to be this
discontinuity where you're waiting for
the proceeds of a technology you're
investing in. Those take time and the
needs of that technology, especially
something as power intensive as AI at a
time when we're also trying to modernize
the power grid because some of it just
hasn't been maintained across the United
States. So we have a number of power
company CEOs on our boards and councils
and they're always telling us it takes
so long to get a transformer because
there's bottlenecks. Now they're
worrying about tariffs on transformers
and are the components of transformers.
Then they're competing with
data center needs and companies that say
I'll just build my own power to support
this. And so that's just a marketplace
that was developed for a much smaller
footprint in power and now has to ramp
up. That's going to take time and the
proceeds from AI technology are just
nascent. We're just not seeing them come
through in productivity. Some of the
easy wins that a company might have done
probably are behind us or you know, you
think okay, do I need two copy editors
or one? Well, if I have one copy editor
and AI, I'm okay. But those are easy
wins, right? The real transformational
type of productivity things are for
things we haven't even really thought of
yet. You know, I always use this example
of thinking about the original iPhone or
smartphone against the Blackberry. So,
when it came out, I'm like, this is just
a fancier Blackberry. And then
ultimately, of course, I was totally
wrong. This was a much more trans
just transformational technology because
we developed things on that technology.
>> I still miss the Blackberry.
>> Me, too. I never had so well on the Oh.
>> I used to file stories just on the
Blackberry.
>> I could type entire epic novels on a
Blackberry, and I've got the thumb
problem of the thumbs meet in the
middle. I'm on a mini. It's not working.
>> Okay, so just going back to the vibes
more generally, one thing that's already
come up multiple times in this
conversation is the idea that if you ask
people what they think about the
economy, they say like, oh, and it's not
great. If you ask them what they think
about their own personal economic
situations, they say they're fine. And
to the point about the tariffs earlier,
businesses will say, we're very worried,
but on the other hand, they don't seem
to be changing their actual activity
just yet. What's your thesis or your
theory for why we keep getting that
disconnect?
>> So, this isn't not an uncommon
disconnect, by the way. People have been
historically, and not all the time, of
course, but when they have concerns
about the national economic progress,
they will tell you in poor sentiment.
And when there's a lot of transition,
right? Just think of the transformations
we're going through. We're trying to
bring down inflation, which has been
tiring. Trying to think about bringing
manufacturing and other things back to
the United States. Thinking about
deploying a workforce that's
domestically driven. Those are big
transformations at a time when people
are looking at some of their neighbors
and saying, I see Joe buying less
things. He didn't get a new car this
year. He always gets a new car. That's a
lot of pressure. And so, but their own
personal situation, they're still be
able to go to the grocery. they can buy
something for their kids, they can
invest in repairing their home or going
on a vacation, and so they feel okay.
And they also feel personally secure in
their job, but they're worried about the
broader labor market. And I think that's
natural. And my theory is that when
there's so much change, people get
worried. It doesn't matter if they think
the change is even good, they just get
worried. And they're worried that we're
standing on One person put it this way,
I'm worried we're standing on a
precipitous cliff. I love the view I'm
looking out, I'm fine, but you know,
anything can happen.
>> Yeah.
>> And so I think that anything can happen
piece makes them nervous, which is one
of the reasons Another reason to come
out and talk to people is when I talk to
people, I say, "Here's what we're doing,
it and here's how we would handle
something if we did look a bit tippy in
the economy." And that helps.
>> So you just gave a speech here in Alaska
right before we're recording this
episode, and you said something
interesting in your speech. I Now I'm
forgetting the exact word, but something
about things are different, but they're
not that different. Or that in the past,
this is not the first time people have
felt periods of change or
>> not the first time that central banks
have had to deal with uncertainty.
>> right. That's what it was. That
basically, yes, things are very
uncertain, but this is the story of
central banking.
>> This is indeed the story of central
banking. If you were going to write a
novel or do a whole 'nother podcast on
central banking,
>> But there's never been a time where it's
like, "Oh, we know what's going on.
We've got this under We know what the
future looks like."
>> Exactly. I mean, just let's think of my
time at the Fed so far. So we had 9/11.
That was pretty uncomfortably uncertain
and traumatic at the same time. Then we
had the global financial crisis. That is
a tremendous period of uncertainty that
lasted a number of years. Then there was
the pandemic. That was not a very
certain or very clear time in our our
history. And so now we have uncertainty,
but it is not something that we are
unpracticed at. So I think that's why
the important point to reassure people
on is we don't wait for clarity before
we act. Because if we did wait for
clarity before we act, we would be
constantly behind.
>> One thing that does seem to be new, at
least in my lifetime, possibly not if
you were alive in the 1970s, but
political pressure on the Fed. And we've
certainly seen some instances of that
coming from President Trump, who has not
been shy about saying what he would like
to see in terms of interest rates. How
are you dealing with that?
>> You know, we do have many periods in our
history where there's been pressure to
move the interest rate because of course
that would
be part of the way the president or the
administration or Congress would like to
see the Fed go. But that's why the Fed
is independent because ultimately
Congress gave
us the monetary policy responsibilities
so that we could make decisions that go
past any particular administration, that
are independent of political activities
or political plans. So those are good
things about the Fed. And ultimately, if
you take a job at the Federal Reserve,
and especially if you're in leadership
of the Federal Reserve, Federal Reserve
Bank president or a governor, you have
to almost like tap a stone when you take
the job. It's part of the part of your
oath, basically, that you're going to
make monetary policy that serves all
Americans and in a way that is not
influenced by political leanings one way
or another. So I make the same
decisions, using the same information,
using the same models and sources. Of
course, the models and sources change
depending on the kind of condition we're
in in the economy, but the process, we
talked about process a moment ago, the
process remains the same.
Be curious.
Figure out as much as you possibly can,
always learn, then take a decision that
you think is right, that we collectively
think is right for the nation and the
outlook, and then it have enough
humility that you can ask the question,
"Did we make the right decision?" And
what more do we need to learn to make a
better one? And I think that always
works, and that's that's immune to
political pressure because ultimately
I get up every day knowing that my work
serves Americans. That's who I work for,
and that's what we do.
>> You made this point about how like if
you know, if you wait for the clear
evidence it may be too late, especially
with the respect to the labor market.
Once it slips, history says it tends to
fall. Last week was the Fed meeting
where there was no rate move, and then
Friday we got a jobs report that was not
only disappointing, significant
revisions. And revisions are a common
thing, but um and Tracy's been writing a
lot about this. We've done some
episodes. Response rates to public
surveys have gone down. There are
concerns about whether you know, we need
a fresh jolt of investment. But these
are the main instruments, right? That
you are looking at when you're piloting
the planet, cetera. Is this making it
harder? Like do you have concerns about
that the quality of your visibility into
the data is
suboptimal right now?
>> You know, I'm going to put it slightly
differently than main instruments. I
think they're key instruments, but we've
been broadening our portfolio of
instruments for monitoring for really
since the GFC, since the global
financial crisis. Because what you
learned in the global financial crisis
is you're not going to get enough
information just looking at these main
series to really know what's going on.
Then we had to do that of course in the
pandemic, and we got all these real-time
series. We were using open table data.
>> Yeah, yeah.
>> Yes, how many people were going out? Or
is it is it transit traffic, etc. So,
what I would offer is this. There's two
things that I think about.
We are
revered.
Have been revered across the globe for
our data collection and our data
continuity and our data integrity. Those
three things are
important to any nation that's trying to
follow things. And not just the the
Federal Reserve, but to policy makers
across the board, including states and
localities, to businesses who need to
know what does the economy look like so
they can put it into their sales
projections. And so, making sure that
we're investing enough in those that
information, making sure we know how
important it is, I think is an essential
goal.
On the other side,
I'm not simply relying on those pieces
of information. And importantly, since
we're in a turning point right now, kind
of a by a transition point, it it feels
like a turning point where the economy
is slowing, inflation is coming down
because of restrictive interest rates,
and we're we're trying to achieve that
soft landing, that the data are always
volatile. They're volatile on any
turning point, whether we're turning
from a downturn into an expansion, you
miss the job growth. When you come down,
you tend to miss the job loss or the net
losses. So, that's something I'm always
I'm familiar with at this point. I've
been doing this for a while. I know
that's going to happen. The magnitude of
the changes is pretty severe on Friday
from the week before. Is that survey
response? Is that seasonal adjustments
because things are different or is that
something else going on? I trust the BLS
will unpack that and give us some answer
about that. But, you know, ultimately on
the response rates,
you know, I say that when I ask people,
"Would you respond to a public survey?"
they've lost a little confidence in
public institutions. Maybe a lot of
confidence in public institutions. And
so, the real call to action here for me
is it is part, you know, the Federal
Reserve is not all public institutions,
but we should do our part to demonstrate
to people and to talk to people, go to
the critics and say, "What is it that
you're not trusting?" And then tell our
story. Maybe we they have things that
they're going to bring that we should
listen to. And basically, lean into this
idea that we do this work for them and
that we want them to trust that we're
doing it for them.
>> Can you talk a little bit more about the
alternative data sources that are
available to you? Cuz I hear this a lot,
this idea that okay, well, payrolls
seems to have a revision problem at the
moment. Maybe there are other indicators
we could look at. Or if a larger chunk
of CPI prices are being imputed or
estimated than they were previously,
maybe there's something else we can look
at. What exactly are these data sources?
Like what is most valuable to you right
now?
>> So, there's privately collected data. We
talked about foot traffic and things,
but there's the ADP employment data. You
can think about that. There's the prices
project. You can look at those data.
Importantly though, I think it's not
just getting other sources of data. It's
learning So, say that a lot of the CPI
prices are imputed. Then we need to
bring our best statistical minds to
think about if I take the ones that
aren't imputed and I look at how
correlated they are with underlying
inflation over time, what do I learn?
Are they a good signal?
>> Is there a messaging challenge here
though? If I think people are very used
to at this point the idea of the Fed
sees the non-farm payrolls number, the
Fed sees
CPI obviously isn't your preferred
inflation measure, but PCE or whatever.
If you're looking at other things or
maybe if you're at turning points in the
economy and so other indicators become
more important at that particular amount
of time, how do you communicate how
you're factoring in that data into your
monetary policy decisions? Because not
everyone is going to be looking at the
same things as you.
>> We talk about what we do. And part of
talking about what we do is to say we
have
history and models that tell us a little
bit about how the economy works. We have
the incoming information and we have all
the periods of time when the information
has been volatile and we can understand
the underlying trend. And then we have
the people we talk to. And what was
interesting about the jobs report on
Friday is it better matched in the
direction of change, not in the
magnitude, it better matched what I've
been hearing. And so, a disciplining
device for data that you don't know if
they're really
accurate is what you hear from people.
Because people do not tell you, I feel
really, really comfortable getting a job
only to find out that the job market
report is bad. What they will tell you
is, "Boy, it's looks really worrisome
out there." And then you get a jobs
report that doesn't look like the rapid
job growth. That was the thing that was
out of whack. The rapid job growth from
the month before is what I said, "Well,
really? That's not what I'm hearing.
What's the gap?" And we spent a lot of
time digging in and unpacking that. But
then when the jobs market report got
revised, I was like, "Okay, that makes
more sense." Even if the direction, I
mean, even if the magnitude is vastly
different than anything I I probably
think will go forward, I think the
direction of change is accurate.
>> Okay, so there's the slowing and as you
indicated some number, who knows, rate
cuts are probably coming in the future.
Obviously, there businesses, when you
read them in the ISM surveys, I was
like, "We need rate relief." There are
people who want to buy a house, we want
rate relief. President Trump obviously,
maybe in part due to interest payments
on the debt, wants to see lower rates.
That being said, even as the markets
price in some cuts in the near term
future, there's been the sig-
significant steepening of the yield
curve. Long end rates haven't come down
that much. So, it's not obvious to me
that even if you delivered cuts, that
all these homeowners or businesses or
the president would get the type of rate
relief that they actually want. I'm
curious like, what would it take to, in
your view,
to get meaningful change at the long end
of the curve, which is where a lot of
where there's a lot of sensitivity?
>> I love that question because I think
it's hard to remind people on a regular
basis that we are not the only game in
town at the Federal Reserve. We don't
control We're not yield curve targeters,
so we're not controlling all the things
that would move the yield curve. What
moves the long end of the yield curve is
of course Fed policy,
inflation expectations. Those have been
well anchored, so I don't think that's
driving them. Geopolitical risks,
how are how we're viewed as a trading
country or reserve currency, what our
debt looks like going forward in
projections, and how we think we're
going to manage all of that together,
right? So, right now it looks like the
markets are just reacting to all of the
risk. We have rising debt, we have
geopolitical risk, we're not sure how
our trading partners like us right now,
and then all of this could be burdensome
and mostly could push up the real rate
of interest over time, right? The
natural rate of interest or the neutral
rate of interest. And so you're seeing
that. And ultimately the Fed can adjust
policy in the short end in a way that's
meant to balance the goals, but we can't
control all the aspects of the yield
curve.
>> I know cuz I I've heard Chairman Powell
and others say a million times, "We
don't comment on fiscal policy. That's
not our business." Nonetheless, I'm
going to
>> Yeah, I know. I know. But, when you look
when you describe those various factors
that push the long end up or keep it
elevated,
could it be that it will be hard to get
those back down to more desirable levels
without some more substantial fiscal
consolidation?
>> Well, let me say this.
>> Cuts.
>> Let me say this. Yeah, let me say this.
>> Okay.
>> We were having these conversations about
the rising neutral rate of interest
before the election, before the
administration changed. And so,
I think we should look to what are the
fundamental factors in our economy that
are changing the neutral rate of
interest, not just in the US, but in the
globe, right? This is The interest rates
are not set nationally. I mean, we set
interest rates nationally, but interest
rates are global. If you remember prior
to the pandemic, interest rates and
after the GFC, interest rates the real
rate of interest was just falling.
Inflation was below most countries'
targets, and it was this sluggish
growth, inflation expectations are
falling, how are we going to manage this
stagnation that's going to come from
this secular stagnation? Then, we of
course inflation rises in almost every
country, and we're talking about the
real interest rate going up, not down.
And so, we're looking at a place where
it settles now at the neutral rate in
nominal terms, setting settling around
three or higher, not at 2.5. So, that's
a pretty big increase in the in the rate
of interest, the neutral rate of
interest, and frankly, the direction
seems to be pushing it up, not pulling
it down. And I think that's where I try
to explain to people the most is that
interest rate cuts, if you think we're
going back to
pre-pandemic levels of interest rates
that were considered neutral, I don't
think that's likely to happen. And
that's commercial real estate folks are
really attuned to this, and they knew
that a year and a half ago. Markets or
knew that a year ago, but I think we're
still working on businesses and
consumers to recognize those were
not those are not days we're likely to
return to, at least in in the near term.
>> You've said that you think the time for
rate cuts is nevertheless coming, and I
take the point that maybe rates aren't
going back to where they were
pre-pandemic, but like certainly we are
talking about cuts, market is expecting
cuts.
What are you waiting to see before you
get absolute certainty that actually
this is the moment where we need to act?
>> Well,
I really I'm not waiting to see anything
as much as I'm
looking to collect the information that
shows that what I believe is happening
is happening. So, it's not like I'm
waiting to see something, and I'm going
to go, "Aha, it worked." I mean, it's
it's happening, and we got to get on it.
It's really about we just keep getting
>> confirmation
>> Yeah, the confirmation, the evidence.
So, let's take the labor market, for
example. So, in advance of the July
meeting, we do this all the time, but
you know, since we just had the July
meeting, let's talk about it. So, in
advance of the July meeting, we were
hearing, "We think the labor market's
softening." So, I'm asking the question,
"Is it weakening?"
You know, softening is is what we would
expect. Weakening is is a different
signal. So, you would take the entire
dashboard of labor market indicators,
and you ask, "What's happening to the
ones that lead?" Initial claims for
unemployment insurance are leading
indicator. They predict where the labor
market's headed. They've been stable.
You unpack You look at all the states,
you get their initial claims data.
There's really no red flag states.
There's only two that are showing a lot
of pickup,
DC an area and Michigan. Those are the
two places. Otherwise, most of them look
pretty stable.
You think about, "Okay, what about job
finding rates? Not just in aggregate,
but by duration of unemployment. When
the labor market's really weakening,
people push out in duration, it's harder
to find a job, but then you see those
job finding rates really decline for out
durations. You're not seeing that. So,
those are wage growth isn't stumbling.
You're just not seeing those things. And
so, for me, it was about, "Okay, we're
seeing a signal that this might be
softening to weakening, but we don't
know yet." So, then, you go back, leave
the interest rate where it is, cuz
inflation's still printing above target,
and you have some more time, but the
first labor market report we get has a
bit of a tick up in unemployment, and
you get those jobs numbers. I will say,
maybe cuz your listeners would be
interested in it, it's not a good time
to look at levels. It's really not a
good time to look at employment rate. I
mean, you know, the I'm not employment
rate.
>> Employment level.
>> Employment level. Like, how much job
growth do we have? Cuz we've had this
very large swing in how many immigrants
are in the labor force. The labor force
went from people I'd estimate at 150 is
the trend growth we need to have so that
unemployment doesn't rise. Now, it's in
the 70s, maybe the 60s. That's a big
change. So, I look at rates,
unemployment rate, job finding rate,
quit rate, all the rates.
>> Powell said, that well. Like, look at
the unemployment rate.
>> Yeah, look at the you look at rates. And
the unemployment rate is a good thing to
look at, but it will lag deterioration
in the labor market. So, you have to
look at those other ones as well. So, I
look at initial claims for unemployment
insurance cuz people have to go and
file. It's a good administrative record.
And then I look at quits rates, job
finding rates, those types of things.
And there I didn't see signs of
weakness. But, you can't wait forever.
And at this point, the piece of
information I'm also getting is that
there are very few signs that inflation
tariff-based inflation in the goods
sector is spilling over to the other
sectors, and inflation expectations are
stable at the medium and longer end.
There's not much of a case for
persistence at that point. So, then you
think, "Well, if we really want to get
the soft landing and give people what
they deserve, which is
lower inflation, 2% price stability
inflation, and a labor market that still
sustainably works, well, we we've got to
start recalibrating policy."
>> This is like a really stupid question. I
feel like it's one of these things I
should know or have researched before I
came, but is there much sensitivity when
here in Alaska to the changes in
immigration policy? Do you hear that
from business people? Like, I don't I
don't I don't I actually realize I don't
know anything about like the role of
immigrant labor way up here.
>> hear this a lot in all communities, but
so far people have said it's not really
biting us. And the reason is, and they
use that term "biting us." And here's
So, what's the reason? So, then you ask,
"Why? Cuz you use a lot of immigrant
labor, why isn't it biting?" And it's
because labor demand is slowing. So,
we're losing members of the labor force
at the same time labor demand is
slowing, which is I would offer one of
the reasons we're still seeing the
balance in the labor market that we have
because those workers are not coming or
they're leaving, and then the domestic
labor supply is consistent with the
labor demand that's out there. But,
firms tell me on a regular basis that if
they were growing like they were a year
ago, they would have a shortage.
>> Mhm.
One thing I've been thinking about a lot
recently is the idea of whether or not
starting points kind of matters. So, for
the past few years, one of the big
things that's happened is the US economy
has surprised to the upside over and
over again, and US exceptionalism has
really been the theme. And so, I'm
curious if those years of unexpected
growth if that gives you more wiggle
room or more runway, perhaps, in terms
of having to cut. Do you feel like the
starting point matters? If you were
starting lower, would you be in more of
a hurry?
>> That's a really good question. So, let
me let me think through I'll let me walk
through how I
think about it. I'll just walk through
how I think about it. So,
yes, you have to take contextualization
around it, right? You know, with where
you start matters. But right now, I
don't think we're in that place where
it's actually is relevant. Here's why.
Two years ago, if we had a hot labor
market and it turns it was even frothy,
and inflation's printing at, you know,
5%, well, then that's a very different
economy in terms of where we are than
today. But right now, we have an economy
that's really resilient. It has proven
its resiliency. But we're also very
close to getting to a point of maximum
employment and price stability. So, then
if you have shocks to the economy and
you're in this balance, well, then and
you got interest rates that are
restrictive, you end up being more
vulnerable.
>> Mhm.
>> So, it is true that the economy has
outperformed everyone's expectations
over the past several years. That's just
a fact. And I think that bodes well for
the momentum and the resilience of our
economy collectively to weather shocks.
But now, as we get the labor market in
balance, we're starting to see some
softening, we're starting to see some
sentiment, we have been seeing sentiment
come down, and then on top of it,
inflation's close to our target and
interest rates are still restrictive,
that leaves us more vulnerable. Think
back to 2019.
>> Mhm.
>> 2019, we cut rates twice. And we did
that in part because we had all these
headwinds coming from overseas. So, we
weren't in a precarious place, but we
were accommodating
to the headwinds, or we're trying to
support the economy against those
headwinds to ensure we didn't tip over.
I see today as very similar. The only
difference, and it's important
difference, it's a very important
difference, inflation's not 1.8.
Inflation is higher and meant expected
to go higher at least temporarily on the
basis of tariffs. And so, you're it's
always more challenging, and this will
be a communications challenge if we are
lowering the interest rate in the face
of rising inflation. Then, the burden is
on us to explain that we're not seeing
persistence and to offer what is true,
that if it turns out to be persistence
built, we will turn around and raise the
interest rate.
>> I do notice that everyone's talking
about short-term price pressures, but no
one's using the term transitory anymore.
Is that
>> What word? I don't even know what you're
talking about.
>> Going back to the spring,
as you said, it sort of looks like the
tariffs aren't creating spillover. But
there was this idea that it's not just
the tariffs per se and the question of
whether tariffs would be an inflationary
driver, but also just like policy
volatility, that's sort of like the
second derivative of tariffs, etc. And I
don't know, I'm just going to state my
opinion. I don't think we will ever have
something under this administration of
tariff certainty. You know, I think
these are going to be moving numbers for
a long time. That's just my personal
opinion. But on the other hand, it does
feel like the range of possible outcomes
has narrowed. We've gotten deals and you
know, it it feels like the range of
possible outcomes is less wide than it
was in April. Has that been a factor in
your thinking, you know, okay, tariffs
are going to happen, but does it feel to
you like we have more certainty over
what the trade picture will look like
today than we had in early April?
>> Absolutely. I think when the tariff
announcements on liberation day were
very high, it wasn't clear that
countries wouldn't reciprocate and
tariff us or that they
>> was no retaliation?
>> And and no retaliation, that they
wouldn't that they wouldn't actually
that they would go to the negotiating
table. And so all of that's happened.
And then on top of it, it wasn't clear
how firms would respond. Would re-firms
just sit on the sidelines and wait for
it all to be over or would they continue
to participate in their economy and in
their growth? And so there was this
period for the first three or four weeks
after the original announcement where
firms are like, I got to wait cuz I
don't know and I'm In fact, some firms
were not even bringing uh the ships had
sailed, they were already outside the
port, they weren't taking delivery on
the goods because they wanted to wait
and see. But now, one of my contacts
said, "Uncertainty is the new normal. We
expect uncertainty for the next four
years and or three and a half years. And
so we're just going to live with it. And
when you live with it, you don't change
the fact that you want to grow and you
want to hire and you want to do these
things, but you do
you do make more careful decisions
because you don't know what could
happen. But we If you wait for the
uncertainty to clear, this is what he
said, if you wait for the uncertainty to
clear,
you will find that four years later
you've lost your business. So we're not
doing it."
>> Hm. So one of the things you've
emphasized in your career is the
importance of Fed communication and the
messaging. And I just want to go back to
the Central Bank independence idea
because
one of the concerns, I would argue right
now, is that
sure, individual Fed presidents, Fed
governors might emphasize that the
Central Bank is in fact independent, but
perhaps there's an optics problem if in
a month or so the Fed decides to lower
rates while the president has been
relentlessly posting on Truth Social
about the need to lower interest rates.
A lot of people would say, well, you
know, that's the kind of thing that you
might see in a in an emerging market or
something like that.
How do you manage that particular optics
problem?
>> You explain why you made the decision.
Ultimately, if we just put the decision
out, we just raised a flagpole saying
interest rates have been cut 25 basis
point, I think we'd be very vulnerable
to what you just said because then
optics dominate reality. But what what
you do instead, the remedy for that, is
be very open about how you're making
decision, how you're balancing the
tradeoffs. I mean, we're definitely in a
tradeoff space, right? Because that
we're not in the divine coincidence. The
divine coincidence is a lovely place for
central bankers to be. They wish they
could live there all the time where one
interest rate solves both goals. Not
where we are. If we lower the interest
rate, takes some of the downward
pressure off inflation, but we'll still
get there, but we're supporting the
labor market. If we completely support
the labor market with no attention to
inflation, we're likely to see it shoot
up again. So, not perhaps as high as it
was before, but definitely there. So,
those are tradeoffs. We have to explain
to the American people we're making
decisions under tradeoffs and we're
lowering the policy rate because we
don't want to break the labor market in
an effort to give you a little bit lower
inflation a little bit faster. I think
that's the burden on us. That's our
responsibility and we have to do better
at it.
>> So, here's another question that I'm
curious about over the length of your
career. Do you feel like the stock
market is more important to the economy
than maybe it was 20 years ago? And, you
know, people look at financial
conditions and there's many things that
go into that, but one of them is just
asset prices, which for many Americans
who have some exposure to the stock
market is just unbelievably fantastic
time and you're sort of again at ground
zero of the companies that have driven
helped many people retire comfortably in
America, the companies in your district.
But when you think about like the sort
of flywheel and momentum of the economy,
does the sort of stock market component
of financial conditions and the wealth
effect perhaps, is it more important to
the economy than say it was when you
started in central banking?
>> Only from the standpoint that more
people are accessing the stock market,
but still not the majority of people,
right? More people have it than have a
401K or have some some kind of an index
fund they're investing in, but it's not
you so universal that it's a main
driver. What I have noticed is that
since the stock market rebounded, you
know,
is that a lot of people who thought they
were going to return to work from the 55
and older went back into retirement or
taking care of grandchildren cuz there
was a lot of ideas, you know, that is a
very sensitive group of people and if
you've retired and then you see your
stock market valuations fall, your 401K
fall, you think, "Oh, maybe I should do
something." But
>> The rising stock market is contributing
to labor market tightness.
>> Well, if that was the main group we were
relying on, but I think that is
something interesting. I mean, then
what's really contributing to the lower
labor force is immigration and the fact
that we have a baby boom aging into into
retirement, but I think the stock
market's more interesting from that
point. I think really what's
even more interesting to me is the fact
that you have to look at a variety of
things. You have to look from how banks
are doing, how private equity's doing,
how the stock market's doing, what does
it all tell you? And so
we are broadening how we calculate
financial conditions. You can't just
look at the interest rates. I used to
When I first started at the Fed, when we
were talking to our boards and councils,
we had a little chart of interest rates.
It had the 30-year, the 10-year, the
2-year Treasury and it had a mortgage
interest rate. Now you have to talk
about financial conditions writ large.
Are they tighter? Are they Are they
softer? What is more accommodating? What
is it? And I think that's a change in
the marketplace that's meant we all have
to be very knowledgeable about the
entirety of the forces that affect
financial conditions.
>> Since you mentioned baby boomers,
there's something I've been thinking
about a lot and it's not really a doubt,
it's a question that's particularly
relevant for the short-term path of
monetary policy. But when we got that
jobs report last week,
the only two there were two sectors that
drove the job gains and it was like
health care and social some sort of
social assistance. So very similar
things. It's clearly that this aging
population is itself going to be a
sustained source of labor demand
probably for month after month even in a
possible recession, right? Like this
seems like mechanical. When you look out
at the long term and you think about the
American economy, how much concern do
you have? I don't know if you'd call it
a crowding out effect or something that
like the productive base of the economy
more and more of it will have to go to
in some way especially given the sort of
demographic pyramid such as it is, in
some way support seniors.
>> We're all going to be working in nursing
homes.
>> Yeah.
>> Well,
this has been something that we know is
coming for 30 years.
>> Mhm.
>> I started my career. I started writing
my dissertation on aging and and taking
care of people and how does that change
the
economy and what do we have to do and
how does it change growth and output and
potential. And one of the things you can
see is as if you lose workers, then they
go into retirement, you're going to
constrain labor supply, labor growth,
but you're also going to tip the pyramid
of what we have to produce and what we
have to take care of. And so that's
happening. You can see health care is
growing, etc. Education now just in
state budgets, if you look at state
budgets, there's a battle between do we
take care of our older
citizens or do we invest in education?
And it sounds, you know, it's dire
sounding, but honestly that's the
trade-offs. We're a nation now who has a
very an aging population with with
increasing needs and
the younger population and even the
economic productive capacity has to
support that. So the answer to that is
you have to grow the economy and you
have to be strategic enough and this is
not the Fed's job, but this is something
that I think many Americans are trying
to do, many governments are trying to
do, and national and state and local.
How do you create an economy that can
support those and still support the
citizenry that is in their working age
and families? Well, you're going to use
technology, of course, and you're going
to
think about, you know, making more
strategic decisions about what we need
to do to ensure that we have a diverse
economy, etc. The concentration in
education and health care and other
things that we've been seeing, that's
not new. I mean, that was been going on.
People were talking about that a couple
years ago or a year ago. What's
interesting is how durable will that be,
right? Health care makes good jobs and
it helps the economy cuz it puts
resources, they earn a living, they come
back, they buy things if they weren't
going to health care. But, we don't have
enough people currently interested in
health care to support that if it keeps
on growing. I think that's another
challenge that you're seeing and
hospitals across the country are trying
to manage that.
>> Since Joe asked you a wealth effect from
stocks question, I'm going to ask a very
similar question in relation to crypto.
Because this is actually something that
has changed quite a bit since we last
spoke to you. I mean, crypto prices are
still going up, the industry seems to be
expanding, the administration is clearly
very, very crypto friendly. Are we at
the point where crypto perhaps matters
for monetary policy, either from a
sentiment perspective, that wealth
effect perspective, or from a financial
stability perspective, which of course,
you know, as San Francisco Fed
president, that's under your mandate as
well.
>> So, the way I think about crypto and the
conversations about stable coins and
other things, so let's separate crypto
from stable coins for a minute.
Putting a big umbrella and people think
it's the same, but it's actually very
different. So, a stable coin is another
way to fund yourself so you can do you
can trade, right? It's I can do a
cross-border transaction. I don't have
to wait. I don't have to do currency
changes. And so those things are just
about a technology or an innovation that
smooths out the exchange, particularly
across borders. The crypto is an asset.
This is just an it's a digital asset, so
you can invest in it and it can grow,
but it can also decline. And I think
there's appetite for other kinds of
assets to invest in. You don't have to
invest in a mainline blue-chip company.
You can invest in this and you can get
some gains. So the question for me is
always how do we incorporate that, maybe
it's enthusiasm, and also that risk into
our assessment of how looser or tighter
financial conditions and how vulnerable
is the economy to financial stability
concerns. So you're right to ask, you
know, is it big enough now that we would
look at it? I think it is big enough we
would look at it. It's not that it's big
today, so it's material. It's that it's
big and growing.
>> Mhm. It's getting bigger every time. So
>> Yeah, the direction of travel matters.
>> of travel. I feel a little bit like back
in the
90s, you could see people doing some
Well, maybe really the 2000s after the
dot coms, you saw people doing internet
purchases. And we would collect retail
statistics on how many things were
bought on the internet. And people would
regularly say, "That's not big enough.
Don't worry about it." But you know, you
you have to look ahead, right? It might
not be big enough today, but you don't
have time to practice and develop
metrics and practice your evaluations
and learn from that
if you wait till it's giant. So I think
absolutely we have to think about it
right now and assess it as part of what
we do. And the good news is we are
assessing it. And I don't see special
particular risks to this, and I think
Congress is doing what Congress is
supposed to do, looking over the
parameters and saying what's a a stable
coin process that can work. How do we
ring-fence these types of things? That's
what you want. But that doesn't have
those powers. We're implementing our
policy
that in the economy we have and our
elected officials are deciding the
parameters of those exchanges.
>> I think I actually just have one more
question and it's very sort of
straight down the middle macro, but you
know, there's
this obviously, you know, slowing in
some areas, etc. You've described the
state of the interest rate setting as
still in restrictive territory, at least
modestly restrictive. Yet inflation is
still durably above target, but not
massively the way it was a couple of
years ago. Why is that?
>> It takes time. Once inflation gets up,
it takes time to bring it down and
you know, the reason you would adjust
policy before you totally get there,
let's put tariffs aside for a minute and
let's just think about the regular
dynamics of the economy. If you wait to
see the whites of the eyes of 2%
inflation, you will be too late because
policy tightness today is not just a
reflection of where interest rates are
today, it's a reflection of where
interest rates have been over the last
12 to 18 months and they've been
modestly restrictive. So they're
gradually slowing the economy and
gradually bringing inflation down and
the thing we'd been waiting for, at
least I'd been waiting for for a long
time was for this to start showing
through the housing sector and it has
been in the last several months. And so
that's a really big and important sector
that has to have inflation come down for
us to achieve our 2% goal. So if you
started extrapolating services inflation
excluding housing is coming down,
housing's coming down, the goods sector
without the tariffs was coming down and
so you get all of those things and
that's pushing you to 2%. We have to
adjust policy before we get there
because remember anything we do, if we
left it exactly where it is, has another
effect for another 12 to 18 months. Who
knows what exactly the lags of monetary
policy are. The only thing people can
agree with is it has a lag.
>> Mhm.
Just in terms of the importance of speed
here,
if you got confirmation of significant
weakening in the labor market, could a
50 basis point cut be on the table?
>> You know, in in central banking, and
this is true at the Fed, but I think
other central banks as well, you never
want to rule out a tool simply because
we haven't used it before. And we did
use our tools in an aggressive way. But
one shouldn't take that to mean I think
that's the likely outcome. But I do
think we should think of all of our
tools and all of our meetings as being
available to us at all times because the
job isn't pick a tool that's exactly the
one that everybody expects you to use.
The job is
restore price stability and do it
without tripping up the labor market and
leaving people with lower inflation but
no jobs.
>> I actually have one one last question.
>> This happens a lot.
>> But uh
the dollar, you know, you look at a lot
of charts since April 2nd. There's been
a
they bottomed but then they jump back
up. We haven't seen that with the dollar
and I'm curious, you know, people are
concerned about political continuity and
stability and institutional stability in
the United States and the attacks on the
Fed are real even if the fact that it
doesn't change how you do your
day-to-day job. And dollar weakness
could itself be inflationary because we
do have an import bill, etc. I'm just
sort of curious like how you think about
the sort of I guess maybe medium term
when you're thinking about, okay, you
have to hit your mandate. These things
are really outside of your control.
>> Completely outside of our control.
>> Completely outside of our control. But
like how do you think about them in
terms of hitting your mandate at a time
when yeah, there are these sort of like
factors that affect macro that seem
outside of your control?
>> Well,
you know, if you take the just take the
idea that we import things. If the cost
of those
imports goes up either because the
dollar is weaker, we don't make dollar
policy. Just want to say that. We take
the dollar is outside of our world. It's
just another input to our equation. But
if you have a weaker dollar and you're
paying them more to import things or you
have tariffs, so you're paying more to
import things, well, then that's just
going to raise the rate of inflation to
put upward pressure on
So, then the Fed has to think, okay,
what are the things creating upward
pressure on inflation and what are the
things creating downward pressure on
inflation and how do we navigate that to
get to 2% inflation? That's the job
regardless of whether
you always have things that are pushing
inflation up and pulling inflation down.
Our job is to net those things and say
what's left and whatever's left, we use
the interest rate to achieve.
>> All right, I'm sorry. I have one I have
one last question.
>> I knew this was going to happen.
>> At some point, Chairman Powell is going
to be replaced. I don't know if the
president will try to fire him, but it
his term will expire and a new nominee
will come up. From the perspective of a
regional Fed president, what is an
important quality of the chairman in
terms of like being successful and
working with the rest of the FOMC?
>> You know, I think you could be a
regional Fed president, you could be
anyone who works at the Federal Reserve
in the Federal Reserve system, you could
simply be a citizen of the United States
and someone who cares deeply about how
the country goes and the the
requirements are always the same. You
put other people first above your own
self, you think about decisions that
serve the American people and you do
that without flinching if the criticism
comes. As long as you're doing and
you're using your committee and you're
getting to a judgment that you think is
best for the American people, that's an
important quality. And the other
important quality is to listen.
The diversity of the inputs we get from
all types of people, businesses,
communities, markets, that's important.
The disagreements or differences of lens
that people put on things and say, well,
I don't see the world like that. Any
leader, no matter what they're leading,
has to be able to listen to be
successful. That's my personal belief.
You have to listen, you have to know
what
you know, you put your best ideas out
there, you have to be willing to listen
to criticisms or support and then you
have to turn around and ask people,
let's use this disagreement to our
advantage as opposed to using it as a
way to to divide and I think that's
historically what have made the most
successful Fed chairs, but honestly it
makes a successful committee member. We
all have to go in with the idea that
this is not about us. This is about the
people we serve. We know who those are,
the American people.
>> Joe, we should run for Fed chairs. All
we do is listen.
>> That's right.
>> Basically it.
>> But then you But then you do have to
decide.
>> Okay, yeah, all right. All right, we're
not we're not that good at that. All
right, Mary Daly, thank you so much for
coming back on Odd Lots.
>> My complete pleasure and I'm so glad we
did it in Alaska.
>> thrilled that we get to travel to
Alaska.
>> Thank you.
>> Joe, that was a real treat of a
conversation being able to interview the
San Francisco Fed President for over an
hour in Alaska of all places. I do
really like how she summarized the idea
of the state as like this really good
microcosm at the moment of all these
different crosscurrents in the US
economy, particularly tariffs,
inflation, housing, immigration. And I
also liked how she explained that the
important thing about running a regional
district is kind of knowing which states
are more useful to look at for leading
indicators versus others at different
times. I hadn't thought about that
before.
>> No, that is really interesting and that
was obviously a real treat. This whole
trip is a real treat. You get to come to
Alaska, which we've never been to to
learn about new economies and so forth.
Also to just get that much time with a
member of the FOMC, a regional Fed
President because yes, there's always
uncertainty, right? But
we have a lot of uncertainty these days
and there's so many short-term and
long-term questions that are super
interesting to me, whether it's the sort
of demographic things, whether it's the
diffusion of AI, but also just like what
is going on over the last few months
with the impact of the tariffs on
economic activity. Like we have both
short-term and long-term questions right
now that are very big.
>> Well, that was another thing that stood
out to me, the idea that the revisions
in the most recent jobs report weren't
in themselves like that surprising
because they actually confirmed what
people had been expressing in sentiment
surveys for like some months now, right?
And so for Mary it was sort of like,
"Oh, actually the aberration is that
this wasn't showing up in the jobs
numbers, the official jobs numbers
sooner."
>> Yeah, it's interesting because I
remember like those ISM, for example,
reports from April and May. They did not
show this the employment sub they were
very bad, but this employment sub
indices in particular were bad. So it
does sort of, yeah, the revisions,
although no one people don't love
seeing, "Oh, this data was wrong." It
certainly fits more with the broader
story. It makes things a little bit more
cogent. So it's interesting to hear
that.
>> You know the other thing I liked about
that that conversation.
>> Mhm.
>> You didn't mention whales once.
>> And now you you brought it
>> Now I've reminded you. So okay,
listeners, steel yourself for Joe
inserting a lot of whale and Moby Dick
commentary into the next few episodes.
>> Is the is the soft landing the the Fed
Moby Dick? No, I don't think so. It's
it's a it's a moral thing to pursue.
>> Okay, shall we leave it there?
>> it there.
>> This has been another episode of the Odd
Lots podcast. I'm Tracy Alloway. You can
follow me at Tracy Alloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at The Stalwart. Follow our guest
Mary Daly. She's at Mary Daly Econ.
Follow our producers Carmen Rodriguez at
Carmen Arman, Dash Bennett at Dash Bot,
and Keil Brooks at Keil Brooks. For more
Odd Lots content, go to
bloomberg.com/odd lots for the daily
newsletter and all of our episodes. And
you can chat about all of these topics
24/7 in our discord discord.gg/otlots.
>> And if you enjoy Odd Lots, if you like
it when we go on field trips to Alaska,
then please leave us a positive review
on your favorite podcast platform. And
remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely ad-free. All you
need to do is find the Bloomberg channel
on Apple podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.